It's been a year since I've moved to Silicon Valley. I've been thinking a lot about where I want to be, geographically, in the next few years. I though I felt for some time that being physically present in Silicon Valley has been extremely valuable for my personal growth, I've been unable to articulate why I feel this way.

HackerNews is one of the sites I read regularly; and as most avid readers of hackernews will attest, there exists a vocal group of SV haters on the site. The usual arguments against the valley include the high cost of living and the circlejerk culture. I take these with a pinch of salt because I actually live here and can make judgements for myself. Nevertheless, these opinions make me feel uneasy about my inability to justify why I am here.

Over the past few months, not only have I stayed in the valley, but I've also left it. I've gone back to Singapore where I grew up, I've gone back to Chicago where I went to college. These trips have acted as a sounding board to inform me how Silicon Valley has changed me.

I have come to realize that learning the ethos of the valley has been one of the most significant and underestimated benefits of being here. These are the beliefs that, consciously or not, many people here subscribe to and make decisions by. I want to argue that these beliefs exist and are beneficial.

The first pillar of this ethos is that ability drives success.
The second is that you can change the world.


So what are these beliefs? The first is that skill is most important for success. You might say: 'But Kao! Everyone believes skill is important!' But if you really think about it, this isn't true in most places in the world. Most places in the world don't care about skill. If you don't have the connections, the experience, or the qualifications; or if you didn't follow the system, success isn't accessible to you no matter your skill.

Obviously, functionallly Silicon Valley isn't perfectly meritocratic. But what matters is the that the people making the decisions believe they are. And the result is that high school kids are 

 Young millionare kids.Connections. Age, experience. Not here. What can you do?

This belief is important because it encourages self-determination. Skill feels internal to us, within our control. I can think of motijWhen the thing that determines our success is within us. Nowhere else have I seen such 
Challenge things. (Disrupt) Learn, improve yourself.

You, as an individual, can change the world. This is cliche of course. Change the world is code for make an impact larger than you can imagine. Dream big. Work hard.

People in other places in the world pay lip service to these beliefs. People in Silicon Valley taste the beliefs. They've seen its effects. 


Meritocraticj
