---
layout: post
title:  "Why Linear Thinking isn't enough for Analytics"
date:   2013-07-29 02:54:29
categories: data_science
---

I think that the perception of analytics as a focused, linear thought process is misguided. Instead, it is more accurate to view analytics as a cycle of lateral and linear thought processes. This is because analytics is fundamentally about searching for signals in data that can be used to explain or predict behavior. Searching means covering intellectual ground and checking if a signal exists at each location. The latter is achieved via lateral thinking and the former through focused, linear probing. 

Let's talk about what a lateral thought process is, and how it's different from focused, linear probing. To me, the distinction is simple. I think of a lateral thought process as asking questions, or more specifically, creating hypotheses; and focused, linear probing as checking them. Asking questions is lateral because one question doesn't deductively lead to another. In between each question, you'll hear voices in your head going: "What if .." or "Perhaps ... ". That's you being creative.

Asking a Good Question
======================
As with doing any kind of research, asking a good question is hard and important. It's hard because a good question opens a new paradigm. But by definition, you can't see a new paradigm while stuck in the old one. It's important because *your answer can only be as good as the question*. No matter how deep you dig, if there's nothing to be found, you won't find anything.

While interning as a fraud analyst at Enova, a payday loan company, my task was to explore how bank account numbers could be used to detect fraudulent loan applications. The banks had told us that the account numbers were random and that we were wasting our time studying them. However, on the basis that few things are as random as they seem, we asked ourselves: How could we tie an account number to the age of the account? This would be very powerful since fraudulent applications would more likely be too young for the age of the applicant. For example, a 45 year old man with a 1 year old account would more likely be fraud than one with a 20 year old account. Stuck in this paradigm, I tried for two weeks to find a signal and gave up. 

The next day, I was imagining myself as a fraudster looking to make loans with my stolen personas and realized that unless I had been preparing for years to attack Enova, I would have to set up many different bank accounts in a short period. I realized that a better question would thus be: How do we tell which bank accounts were created together? I pulled a few SQL queries and made a startling discovery: Using a combination of digits of the account numbers, I could deduce if two bank accounts from the same branch were created on the same day. Digging further, I found that a whopping 87% of all prior fraud loans had a matching loan on the same day. Better yet, the false positive rate was only 11%. This made sense because it would be highly unlikely for multiple people who had applied for loans on a particular day to have also created their bank accounts at the same branch on the same day.

Context Switching
==================
So my first lesson at Enova was that lateral thinking is important because asking good questions can lead to big wins. But as I paid more attention to tracking good questions, I became distracted chasing down stray ideas while I was checking an existing hypothesis. Sometimes, with more than 10 SQL queries open, I'd forget what I was originally trying to check. Other times, I'd struggle to avoid being distracted. Only to find that later on, even with my notes, I'd be unable to recreate the rich thought processes behind the ideas. As such, I'd have to start the lateral thinking process cold.

Apparently, the human brain, or perhaps just _my_ brain, simply isn't suited for simultaneously handling lateral and linear thought processes. Unfortunately, the analytics process is in essence, a series of questions asked and verified. The faster one repeats this cycle, the more intellectual ground is covered, and the more likely a signal will be found. As such, I think that switching between linear and lateral thought processes defines the analytics process and is likely the biggest determinant of success.