---
layout: post
title: "People are Mostly the Same"
date: 2015-01-27 02:54:29
categories: writing
---

People like to think they are special. They also like to think of others as different. Typically, the first happens when they do well, and the second when the other person does badly. What is common to both beliefs is the notion that there is a part of a person's identity that is quintessentially them, that is distinct from their experiences and associations, that can be used to assignresponsibility for outcomes.

For many people, the size of this individual identity fluctuates depending on circumstances. In tough times, it shrinks away letting associative identity take the hits. "I'm smoking because all my friends smoked growing up." In good times, it enlarges to take credit for a job well done. "I aced this test because I'm smart." These fluctuations make individual identity seem dynamic and important, giving us the perception that our thoughts and actions, and those of the people around us, are determined by it.

As I have grown older, I have come to realize that individual identity counts for a lot less than people think. There have been a number of situations where I have looked negatively upon someone else's actions, only to be in that same situation later and find myself drawn to the same course of action. And most tellingly, what looked like a character flaw for the other person, often started to seem more like just a tough situation in my case.

To be intellectually honest then, is to realize that people aren't so different. People behave differently not so much because they have different quintessential qualities, but because they are in different circumstances.

As such, understanding a person becomes mostly a matter of understanding their circumstances. Being able to place a person within a trope based on which school they attended, what their parents do, or in which city they grew up, explains more variation in their behavior than even self-declared explanations.

But more than helping us understand people, realizing that people aren't so different is good because it encourages empathy. Dismissing people because we think they are different is a blackhole from which we cannot recover. Instead, when we realize that their actions are mostly a result of their circumstances, we are encouraged to understand their circumstances and associations. Through repetition, we learn the distinctive traits of groups, even groups that we don't belong to, and this expands our understanding of other people in the group.

